>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, JUNE 27: AFTER A
DRAMATIC WEEK AT THE SUPREME
COURT, A LOOK AT SOME DECISIONS
STILL TO COME; EXAMINING THE
CASES AGAINST SUSPECTED ISIS
MEMBERS HERE AT HOME; AND IN OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT, THE DAMAGING
EFFECTS STRESS CAN HAVE ON YOUNG
CHILDREN, ESPECIALLY THOSE
LIVING IN POVERTY.
>> Reporter: ONE NIGHT, THE
CHILDREN ASLEEP UPSTAIRS,
BULLETS CAME FLYING THROUGH THE
WINDOWS AND DOOR, JUST FEET FROM
WHERE SHE WAS SITTING.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS OF
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
EVEN THOUGH THE U.S. SUPREME
COURT RULED FRIDAY THAT THE
CONSTITUTION GUARANTEES SAME-SEX
COUPLES THE RIGHT TO MARRY IN
ALL 50 STATES, SOME STATES ARE
NOT ISSUING MARRIAGE LICENSES,
AT LEAST NOT YET.
HOPEFUL COUPLES HAVE BEEN TURNED
AWAY IN PARTS OF MISSISSIPPI,
ALABAMA, TEXAS AND LOUISIANA.
SOME OFFICIALS SAY THEY'RE
WAITING FOR LOWER COURTS TO
OFFICIALLY LIFT BANS ON SAME-SEX
MARRIAGE.
MISSISSIPPI'S ATTORNEY GENERAL
SAID THAT'S WHY THE SUPREME
COURT'S DECISION IS NOT
IMMEDIATELY EFFECTIVE THERE.
ALABAMA'S SUPREME COURT CHIEF
JUSTICE IS ADVISING COUNTY
JUDGES TO DELAY ISSUING THE
MARRIAGE LICENSES, SAYING THE
RULING "DESTROYED THE FOUNDATION
OF OUR COUNTRY, WHICH IS
FAMILY."
IN TEXAS, SOME COUNTY CLERKS DID
ISSUE LICENSES, BUT GOVERNOR
GREG ABBOTT SAYS NO TEXAN WILL
BE REQUIRED BY THE SUPREME
COURT'S DECISION TO ACT CONTRARY
TO HIS OR HER RELIGIOUS BELIEFS
REGARDING MARRIAGE.
LOUISIANA GOVERNOR AND
REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL
CANDIDATE BOBBY JINDAL SAYS THE
HIGH COURT'S DECISION TRAMPLES
ON STATES' RIGHTS ONCE PROTECTED
BY THE 10th AMENDMENT.
TWO WOMEN MARRIED IN CONNECTICUT
SAY THEY HOPE MISSISSIPPI WILL
RECOGNIZE THEIR UNION SOON.
>> I'M VERY DISAPPOINTED.
THIS IS MY HOME STATE.
I WANT TO BE LEGALLY MARRIED IN
MY HOME STATE.
>> Sreenivasan: JOINING ME NOW
IS THE CHIEF WASHINGTON
CORRESPONDENT FOR THE "NATIONAL
LAW JOURNAL," MARCIA COYLE.
SO, MARCIA, YESTERDAY WE TALKED
A LOT ABOUT THE IMPACT OF THE
GAY MARGE RULING, BUT THERE ARE
A COUPLE OF OTHER BIG RULINGS.
I MEAN, NO COURT RULINGS AT THE
SUPREME COURT ARE SMALL, BUT THE
ONES THAT ARE COMING UP ON
MONDAY ARE PRETTY IMPORTANT.
LET'S TALK A LITTLE BIT ABOUT
THAT.
>> ABSOLUTELY, HARI.
THERE ARE THREE CASES THAT ARE
LEFT.
THERE IS A VERY IMPORTANT CASE
INVOLVING THE ENVIRONMENT AND
THE AUTHORITY OF THE
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
TO REGULATE MERCURY EMISSIONS
FROM ELECTRIC POWER PLANTS.
IN THAT CASE, IT'S A QUESTION OF
WHETHER THE E.P.A., THE FEDERAL
AGENCY, SHOULD HAVE CONSIDERED
THE COST OF ITS REGULATION
BEFORE DECIDING WHETHER TO
REGULATE THE MERCURY EMISSIONS.
THERE'S A SECOND CASE THAT'S
VERY IMPORTANT IN TERMS OF HOW
STATES-- STATE LEGISLATURES, IN
PARTICULAR-- REAPPORTION
CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICTS.
ARIZONA CREATED AN INDEPENDENT
COMMISSION TO DO THE REDRAWING
OF DISTRICT LINES FOLLOWING EACH
CENSUS.
AND IT DID THAT BECAUSE, AS
WE'VE SEEN ALL AROUND THE
COUNTRY, REDISTRICTING HAS
BECOME A VERY PARTISAN EFFORT IN
STATE LEGISLATURES.
THE ARIZONA STATE LEGISLATURE
CHALLENGED THE USE OF AN
INDEPENDENT COMMISSION, CLAIMING
THAT IT VIOLATED THE ELECTIONS
CLAUSE IN THE FEDERAL
CONSTITUTION; CLAIMS THAT THAT
CLAUSE GIVES THE AUTHORITY, THE
RIGHT TO STATE LEGISLATURES TO
REDRAW DISTRICT LINES.
AND FINALLY, THE DEATH PENALTY,
WHICH IS NEVER FAR FROM THE
SUPREME COURT'S DOCKET.
THIS IS A CASE INVOLVING LETHAL
INJECTION AND A PARTICULAR DRUG,
MIDAZOLAM, THAT WAS USED BY
OKLAHOMA NOT TOO LONG AGO AS A
REPLACEMENT DRUG FOR THE DRUG IN
ITS THREE-DRUG PROTOCOL THAT IS
USUALLY USED TO MAKE SOMEONE
UNCONSCIOUS WHILE THE OTHER TWO
DRUGS ARE ADMINISTERED.
OKLAHOMA USED MIDAZOLAM AS A
SUBSTITUTE, AND WE SAW REPORTS
OF HOW THE DRUG REALLY DIDN'T
MAKE SOMEONE... MAKE THE DEATH
ROW INMATE UNCONSCIOUS LONG
ENOUGH FOR THE OTHER DRUGS TO BE
ADMINISTERED.
AND IN SOME CASES, THE EXECUTION
LASTED... ONE EXECUTION 20
MINUTES; IN OTHERS THE INMATE
WAS SEEN TO GASP; AND IN
ANOTHER, THE INMATE ACTUALLY
TALKED AND SAID, "THIS ISN'T
WORKING."
SO, A CHALLENGE HAS BEEN BROUGHT
TO THE USE OF THAT PARTICULAR
DRUG, AND WE WILL GET A DECISION
I BELIEVE ON MONDAY AS TO
WHETHER THAT... USE OF THAT DRUG
IS CRUEL AND UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT
UNDER THE 8th AMENDMENT TO THE
CONSTITUTION.
>> Sreenivasan: LOOKING BACK AT
THE CASES, JUST IN THE HIGH-
PROFILE CASE OF THE AFFORDABLE
CARE ACT AND THE GAY MARRIAGE
CASE, WHAT WAS INTERESTING WAS
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS IN HIS
VOTE-- ONE DIRECTION IN ONE
CASE, ANOTHER DIRECTION IN THE
OTHER CASE.
HE'S REALLY BECOME ONE OF THE
MORE SURPRISING JUSTICES.
>> IF WE TAKE AWAY ANYTHING FROM
THIS PARTICULAR TERM, IT IS THAT
EVEN THOUGH THE COURT HAS A
FIVE-JUSTICE CONSERVATIVE
MAJORITY, THOSE FIVE
CONSERVATIVES ARE NOT ALL THE
SAME, JUST AS NOT ALL DEMOCRATS
ARE THE SAME OR ALL CATHOLICS
ARE THE SAME.
THEY HAVE DIFFERENT APPROACHES
TO HOW THEY INTERPRET STATUTES,
HOW THEY READ THE CONSTITUTION.
AND WE SAW THAT PLAY OUT IN THE
HEALTH CARE CASE AS WELL AS
SAME-SEX MARRIAGE.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, WHILE THESE
TWO CASES MIGHT BE WINS FOR
LIBERAL THOUGHT, LIBERAL
IDEOLOGY, THIS DOESN'T MAKE AN
ENTIRE SEASON OR AN ENTIRE
COURT.
>> NO, IT DOESN'T, HARI, AND I
THINK WE HAVE TO BE CAUTIOUS
ABOUT LABELING THE COURT: "OKAY,
SO NOW WE'VE HAD TWO LIBERAL...
HUGE LIBERAL-LEANING DECISIONS.
THIS IS A LIBERAL SUPREME
COURT."
I REALLY BELIEVE THAT EACH TERM
TELLS ITS OWN STORY DEPENDING ON
THE MAKEUP OF THE CASES, THE MIX
OF CASES THAT COME TO THE COURT
AND END UP ON ITS DOCKET.
I CAN REMEMBER DURING THE
REHNQUIST YEARS THAT THERE WERE
SOME TERMS THAT WERE LEFT
LEANING, OTHER TERMS THAT WERE
RIGHT LEANING.
THIS TERM, THE CASES THAT CAME
PLAYED OUT TO THE LEFT SIDE OF
THE COURT.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
MARCIA COYLE FROM THE "NATIONAL
LAW JOURNAL," THANKS SO MUCH.
>> OH, MY PLEASURE, HARI.
TAKE CARE.
>> Sreenivasan: ISIS HAS BEEN
ATTACKING TARGETS THROUGHOUT THE
MIDDLE EAST AND INCREASINGLY
AROUND THE WORLD OVER THE PAST
FEW WEEKS AND MONTHS.
ITS LEADERSHIP HAS ASKED FOR
SUPPORTERS TO CARRY OUT ATTACKS
WHEREVER THEY CAN, INCLUDING
SOME SOFT TARGETS, PLACES LIKE
CITY CENTERS AND RESORTS.
YESTERDAY, THREE SEPARATE
ATTACKS ON THREE CONTINENTS
INJURED AND KILLED DOZENS.
ITN'S NEIL CONNERY REPORTS FROM
THE HOSPITAL WHERE MANY OF THE
INJURED WERE TAKEN IN TUNISIA
AFTER THE ATTACK AT A SEASIDE
RESORT LEFT AT LEAST 38 DEAD.
>> Reporter: THIS IS THE MOMENT
TERROR ARRIVED IN SOUSSE.
AS THE ATTACK GOT UNDER WAY,
HUNDREDS OF TOURISTS, MANY OF
THEM BRITISH, RAN FOR THEIR
LIVES.
ROSS THOMPSON AND REBECCA SMITH
FROM COVENTRY WERE BOTH INJURED.
ROSS WAS SHOT IN THE FOOT BUT
KEPT RUNNING.
>> Reporter: THE TRAUMA OF THE
PAST 24 HOURS FILLS THESE
HOSPITAL ROOMS.
TONY CALLAHAN AND HIS WIFE ARE
AMONG THE INJURED.
>> Reporter: HE SHOWS ME THE
BULLET-RIDDEN BELONGINGS WHICH
SAVED HER LIFE.
>> Reporter: SO MANY LIVES TAKEN
HERE, SO MANY CHANGED FOREVER,
AND SOME STILL HANGING IN THE
BALANCE.
>> Sreenivasan: MONDAY MARKS THE
FIRST FULL YEAR SINCE ISIS
DECLARED THE "CALIPHATE," AN
ISLAMIC STATE, PART OF THE
JUSTIFICATION FOR ITS TERROR
CAMPAIGN ACROSS THE MIDDLE EAST.
JUST THIS WEEK, ISIS CLAIMED
RESPONSIBILITY FOR DEADLY
ATTACKS IN TUNISIA AND KUWAIT,
AND IS SUSPECTED OF AN ATTACK IN
FRANCE.
THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT HAS
ESTIMATED AT LEAST 2,700
WESTERNERS HAVE TRAVELED TO JOIN
ISIS IN THE FIGHTING IN SYRIA,
INCLUDING SOME FROM THE U.S.
NOW, A NEW STUDY FROM FORDHAM
UNIVERSITY LAW SCHOOL SHOWS
ARRESTS IN THE U.S. FOR
ALLEGEDLY SUPPORTING ISIS ARE
GROWING.
SINCE LAST MARCH OF 2014,
FEDERAL PROSECUTORS HAVE CHARGED
56 PEOPLE FOR SUPPORTING ISIS.
LAW ENFORCEMENT KILLED THREE
OTHER SUSPECTS.
FORDHAM RESEARCHERS SAY MOST OF
THE ACCUSED ARE U.S. CITIZENS.
MORE THAN 60% OF THOSE CHARGED
ARE 21 OR YOUNGER, AND MORE THAN
80% OF THE CASES INVOLVED
RECRUITMENT WITH SOCIAL MEDIA.
I'M JOINED NOW BY THE HEAD OF
THAT STUDY, THE DIRECTOR OF
FORDHAM'S CENTER ON NATIONAL
SECURITY, KAREN GREENBERG.
SO, FIRST, I WANT TO ASK, WHAT
DO WE SEE ABOUT THE PATTERNS OF
THESE PEOPLE WHO HAVE BEEN
ACCUSED AND CHARGED BUT NOT YET
FOUND GUILTY?
>> THERE ARE BASICALLY THREE
CATEGORIES OF INDIVIDUALS BEING
CHARGED: THOSE WHO WANT TO
FACILITATE AND RECRUIT OTHERS TO
JOIN ISIS; THOSE WHO WANT TO GO
ABROAD AS FOREIGN FIGHTERS TO
JOIN THE CALIPHATE; AND THOSE
WHO WANT TO COMMIT SOME KIND OF
DOMESTIC TERROR ATTACK IN THE
UNITED STATES.
AND THE PATTERNS ARE LARGELY
THAT THESE ARE INCREASINGLY
YOUNG MEN AND WOMEN WHO ARE
DRAWN TO ISIS FOR A VARIETY OF
REASONS, WHO ARE FROM AN
EXCEPTIONALLY BROAD BACKGROUND.
THERE'S NO WAY TO SAY A
PARTICULAR ETHNIC GROUP OR
NATIONAL ORIGIN OR RELIGION OR
ANYTHING INITIALLY IS WHAT
MOTIVATES THESE INDIVIDUALS.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, A LOT OF
THESE CASES HAVE MATERIAL
SUPPORT AS ONE OF THE CHARGES
THAT THEY HAVE.
WHAT IS MATERIAL SUPPORT IN THIS
DAY AND AGE?
>> MATERIAL SUPPORT IS A VERY
BROAD CATEGORY THAT IS USED MORE
AND MORE BY LAW ENFORCEMENT
SINCE 9/11 FOR, IF YOU WANT TO
GIVE... IT COULD BE ANYTHING
FROM MONEY TO PROVIDING YOURSELF
TO A FOREIGN CAUSE OF A
DESIGNATED FOREIGN TERRORIST
ORGANIZATION.
AND IT'S EXTREMELY BROAD, AND,
THEREFORE, VERY POPULAR AMONG
LAW ENFORCEMENT.
FOR SOME, IT'S OVERLY BROAD.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU KNOW, I
DON'T HAVE TO BE AN A.C.L.U.
LAWYER TO SAY THERE'S A SHIFT
FROM REACTING TO TERROR ATTACKS
TO PREVENTING TERROR ATTACKS,
ENCROACH ON OTHER FREEDOMS OF
HOW I WANT TO EXPRESS MYSELF.
>> THE INTERESTING THING ABOUT
THE ISIS CASE IS THE QUESTION,
ARE THESE THE SAME OR DIFFERENT
FROM THE 550 PRIOR CASES OF
TERRORISM-RELATED ARRESTS THAT
WE SAW SINCE 9/11?
AND TO SOME EXCEPT, THESE FEEL A
LITTLE DIFFERENT.
AND YOU'RE RIGHT-- IF IT'S ABOUT
EXPRESSION, IF IT'S ABOUT DOING
VERY LITTLE, IF IT'S ABOUT BEING
LED BY THE F.B.I. TOWARDS MANY
PIECES OF THE INCIPIENT CRIME,
THAT'S ONE THING.
BUT THERE DOES SEEM TO BE SOME
KIND OF NEW ELEMENT HERE, A NEW
FEELING, AND THAT'S WHY WE DID
THE STUDY.
>> Sreenivasan: AND ONE OF THE
NEW ELEMENTS WAS SOCIAL MEDIA.
SO MANY ARE LURED THROUGH SOCIAL
MEDIA.
I'M WONDERING, DOES LAW
ENFORCEMENT USE THAT SAME SOCIAL
MEDIA TO CATCH THEM?
>> WELL, THAT'S WHAT WE NEED TO
FIND OUT MORE ABOUT.
THEY'VE TALKED ABOUT USING
SOCIAL MEDIA FOR A COUNTER-
NARRATIVE.
THEY'VE TALKED ABOUT USING
SOCIAL MEDIA TO IDENTIFY THEM.
AND YOU'LL SEE THAT IN THE
COMPLAINTS, THEY POINT TO
TWITTER, THEY POINT TO FACEBOOK,
THEY POINT TO A VARIETY OF
DIFFERENT APPS-- INSTAGRAM, FOR
EXAMPLE-- AS WAYS THEY FOUND
THESE INDIVIDUALS AND THEN WERE
ALERTED TO THEM AND BEGAN TO
TRACK THEM AND FOLLOW THEM.
SO, IT'S IMPORTANT BOTH IN THE
RECRUITMENT AND IN THE
DETERRING.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT, KAREN
GREENBERG, FORDHMAN CENTER ON
NATIONAL SECURITY, THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: LEARN MORE ABOUT
HOW ISIS HAS USED SOCIAL MEDIA
TO RECRUIT SUPPORTERS.
WATCH MY INTERVIEW WITH TWO
EXPERTS ON ISLAMIC EXTREMISM
ONLINE AT www.pbs.org/newshour.
TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT IS
PART OF OUR CONTINUING SERIES
EXPLORING POVERTY AND
OPPORTUNITY IN AMERICA.
WE CALL IT "CHASING THE DREAM."
A GROWING BODY OF RESEARCH SHOWS
THAT THE STRESS OF GROWING UP IN
POVERTY CAN HAVE LONG-TERM
EFFECTS ON CHILDREN'S BRAINS AND
COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT.
OUR STORY FOCUSES ON A PROGRAM
IN CONNECTICUT THAT'S BECOME A
NATIONAL MODEL FOR ADDRESSING
THE IMPACT OF WHAT'S KNOWN AS
"TOXIC STRESS."
NEWSHOUR CORRESPONDENT MEGAN
THOMPSON REPORTS.
>> Reporter: IT'S SNACK TIME AT
THE HOME OF RUTH FAJARDO IN
NORWALK, CONNECTICUT, AN HOUR
OUTSIDE NEW YORK CITY.
>> HOW WAS SCHOOL?
>> GOOD.
>> Reporter: RUTH, A 26-YEAR-OLD
IMMIGRANT FROM HONDURAS, CHECKS
IN WITH HER FOUR YOUNG KIDS, A
NORMAL FAMILY SCENE; BUT, FOUR
YEARS AGO, THE FAMILY WAS IN A
VERY DIFFERENT PLACE.
>> EVERYTHING WAS REALLY
A DISASTER.
>> Reporter: RUTH WAS A STAY-AT-
HOME MOM, LIVING ALONE WITH HER
KIDS IN PUBLIC HOUSING.
THE CHILDREN'S FATHER, A HOUSE
PAINTER WHO SUPPORTED THE
FAMILY, HAD GONE BACK TO
HONDURAS.
ONE NIGHT, WHILE THE CHILDREN
WERE SLEEPING UPSTAIRS, BULLETS
CAME FLYING THROUGH THE WINDOWS
AND FRONT DOOR.
>> EVERYTHING WAS BREAKING IN
THE KITCHEN, THE GLASS AND THE
MIRRORS AND EVERYTHING.
EVERYTHING WAS LIKE A HORROR
MOVIE.
>> Reporter: IT WAS A RANDOM
DRIVE-BY SHOOTING.
RUTH'S CHILDREN WEREN'T
PHYSICALLY HURT, BUT HER OLDER
DAUGHTERS, ANDREA AND MICHELE,
CAN'T SHAKE THE MEMORY.
>> YEAH, I WAS SCARED.
I WAS CRYING.
>> I THOUGHT I WOULD DIE.
>> BECAUSE MY MOM, SHE COULD
HAVE GOTTEN SHOT, TOO.
SO, I WAS SCARED THAT SHE WAS
GOING TO DIE.
>> AND WE WOULD GO IN A FOSTER
HOME.
>> Reporter: THAT DIDN'T HAPPEN,
BUT RUTH, WITH NO JOB, NO
DRIVER'S LICENSE AND NO HIGH
SCHOOL DIPLOMA, WAS SCRAPING BY
ON CASH FROM HAVING SOLD THE TWO
FAMILY CARS.
RUTH MOVED IN WITH HER MOTHER.
SHE AND THE FOUR KIDS SHARED ONE
ROOM.
>> I WAS REALLY SAD.
HAVING THEM ALL TOGETHER AND
SLEEPING ON ONE MATTRESS WAS
MESSED UP.
I FELT IT WASN'T FAIR.
>> Reporter: SHE FELT LIKE SHE
COULDN'T HELP HER KIDS,
INCLUDING THE SECOND-OLDEST, WHO
WAS BEING BULLIED AT SCHOOL,
CRYING ALL THE TIME AND HIDING
IN THE CLOSET.
RUTH FELL INTO A DEEP
DEPRESSION.
>> EVERYTHING STRESS ME, I GET
ANGRY EASILY, SO MY KIDS WERE
LIKE THAT.
THEY WERE SCREAMING AT EACH
OTHER.
THEY WERE FIGHTING A LOT.
SO, I THOUGHT I WAS TRANSMITTING
THAT TO THEM.
>> Reporter: YOU WERE
TRANSMITTING THAT.
>> YES.
>> Reporter: JACK SHONKOFF IS A
PEDIATRICIAN AND DIRECTOR OF THE
HARVARD CENTER ON THE DEVELOPING
CHILD.
HE SAYS STRESSFUL SITUATIONS
PROVOKE A PHYSICAL RESPONSE.
>> AUTOMATICALLY, OUR HEART RATE
GOES UP, OUR BLOOD PRESSURE GOES
UP, STRESS HORMONE LEVELS RISE
IN THE BLOOD, OUR BLOOD SUGAR
GOES UP.
IT'S THE BIOLOGY OF THE "FIGHT
OR FLIGHT" RESPONSE.
>> Reporter: SHONKOFF SAYS, FOR
CHILDREN, STRESS IS NORMAL AND
FINE IN THE SHORT-TERM, BUT
CHRONIC, LONG-TERM EXPOSURE TO
STRESS IS SOMETHING VERY
DIFFERENT.
HE CALLS THIS "TOXIC STRESS."
SHONKOFF'S RESEARCH SHOWS TOXIC
STRESS CAN HAVE PROFOUND
CONSEQUENCES FOR HUMAN BODIES
AND BRAINS, ESPECIALLY IN YOUNG
CHILDREN.
>> TOXIC STRESS IS CREATING A
DIFFERENT KIND OF... OF CHEMICAL
ENVIRONMENT IN THE BRAIN.
TOXIC STRESS CAN DISRUPT BRAIN
CIRCUITS THAT WILL BASICALLY
CREATE A WEAKER FOUNDATION FOR A
LOT OF CIRCUITRY THAT'S
ESSENTIAL FOR LEARNING, FOR
MEMORY, FOR SOLVING PROBLEMS,
FOR FOLLOWING RULES, FOR
CONTROLLING IMPULSES.
>> Reporter: ANYONE CAN
EXPERIENCE TOXIC STRESS, BUT
SHONKOFF SAYS POVERTY PRESENTS
THE TYPE OF CHRONIC ADVERSITY
THAT CAN CAUSE IT.
LOW-INCOME FAMILIES ARE ALSO
MORE LIKELY TO LIVE IN
NEIGHBORHOODS WITH HIGH RATES OF
CRIME, DRUG ABUSE AND FAILING
SCHOOLS.
OVER THE LAST FEW YEARS, MANY
OTHER SCIENTISTS HAVE ALSO FOUND
LINKS BETWEEN GROWING UP POOR
AND DIFFERENCES IN COGNITIVE
DEVELOPMENT.
WILL ALL KIDS WHO GROW UP IN A
HIGH-POVERTY SITUATION
EXPERIENCE TOXIC STRESS OR THE
LONG-TERM EFFECTS OF TOXIC
STRESS?
>> ONE THING THAT'S ABSOLUTELY
CLEAR IS THAT NOT ALL CHILDREN
GROWING UP IN POVERTY ARE
EXPERIENCING TOXIC STRESS.
TOXIC STRESS HAS TO DO WITH THE
EXTENT TO WHICH ADULTS IN A
CHILD'S LIFE ARE BUFFERING THAT
CHILD FROM THE STRESSORS AROUND
THE FAMILY, AND BUILDING THE
CHILD'S ABILITY TO COPE AND
ADAPT, WHICH IS BUILDING
RESILIENCE.
AND THE MOST... THE MOST AT-RISK
GROUP ARE PARENTS WHO THEMSELVES
GREW UP IN POVERTY, WHO ARE
VICTIMS OF ABUSE AND NEGLECT.
>> Reporter: WHEN RUTH WAS A
BABY, HER MOTHER LEFT FOR THE
U.S.
>> I WAS 18 MONTH WHEN SHE LEFT
ME WITH MY GRANDMA IN HONDURAS.
>> Reporter: SHE WAS RAISED BY
HER GRANDMOTHER, WHO WAS
ILLITERATE.
THEN, SHE EXPERIENCED TRAUMA AS
A YOUNG TEEN.
>> I WAS MOLESTED, BUT NOBODY IN
MY FAMILY KNEW.
>> Reporter: SHE NEVER GOT HELP
AND STRUGGLED AFTER COMING TO
THE U.S.
FOUR YEARS AGO, ISOLATED AND
WITH FEW RESOURCES, SHE PLUNGED
INTO DEPRESSION.
>> AND WE KNOW THE IMPACT OF
DEPRESSION ON YOUNG CHILDREN IS
DEVASTATING.
>> Reporter: DARCY LOWELL IS A
PEDIATRICIAN AND FOUNDER OF
CHILD FIRST, A NON-PROFIT GROUP
THAT WORKS WITH LOW-INCOME
FAMILIES IN CONNECTICUT, AND
HELPED RUTH FAJARDO.
LOWELL SAYS LOW-INCOME MOMS LIKE
RUTH EXPERIENCE DEPRESSION AT
RATES MUCH HIGHER THAN THE
AVERAGE.
AND DEPRESSION CAN MAKE IT
HARDER TO PROVIDE THE NURTURING
RELATIONSHIP SO VITAL FOR
CHILDREN'S DEVELOPMENT.
>> THAT RELATIONSHIP IS THE
FOUNDATION OF NOT JUST EMOTIONAL
DEVELOPMENT AND MENTAL HEALTH;
IT IS THE FOUNDATION FOR
COGNITION, FOR SCHOOL READINESS,
FOR A SENSE OF COMPETENCE.
AND THAT'S WHAT LEADS TO
CHILDREN TO BE SUCCESSFUL IN
THEIR LIVES.
>> Reporter: RUTH DIDN'T REALIZE
THE COSTS OF NOT INTERACTING
WITH HER KIDS.
>> WHEN THEY TRY TO MAKE ME
READ, I JUST TELL THEM, "I DON'T
LIKE READING."
I DIDN'T PAY ATTENTION TO SCHOOL
WORK OR CHECKING THEIR
BACKPACKS.
AND MY KIDS ALWAYS ARE BUGGING
ME, "LET'S GO TO THE PARK, LET'S
GO... LET'S GO OUTSIDE," AND I
COULDN'T BECAUSE I WAS FEELING
DOWN.
>> Reporter: DID IT SEEM LIKE
YOUR MOM WAS HAPPY, OR DID IT
SEEM LIKE YOUR MOM USED TO BE
SAD?
>> SAD.
>> A LITTLE MAD.
>> HER EYES ARE RED, AND HER
FACE IS RED.
>> AND SOMETIMES WATER IS IN HER
EYES.
>> Reporter: AND HOW DID THAT
MAKE YOU GUYS FEEL, TO SEE HER
LIKE THAT?
>> SAD, SO...
>> I FELT GUILTY BECAUSE I MADE
MY MOM FEEL SAD.
>> Reporter: RUTH SAYS ONE DAY
SHE SAW HER OLDEST DAUGHTER
PLAYING WITH THE OTHER KIDS,
PRETENDING TO BE RUTH.
>> AND SHE STARTED SCREAMING AT
THEM, "STOP FIGHTING, YOU'RE
GOING TO GET EVERYTHING RUINED,"
AND "YOU'RE BAD KIDS," AND STUFF
LIKE THAT.
AND WHEN I SAW HER BEING SO MEAN
WITH THE OTHER ONES, SCREAMING,
THAT'S WHEN I STARTED LOOKING
FOR HELP.
>> Reporter: RUTH FOUND CHILD
FIRST, WHICH PROVIDES HOME
VISITS AND COUNSELING AT NO COST
TO A THOUSAND LOW-INCOME
FAMILIES IN CONNECTICUT.
>> HI, GUYS!
>> Reporter: A PAIR OF CHILD
FIRST COUNSELORS VISITED RUTH'S
FAMILY FOR ABOUT TWO YEARS.
A CARE COORDINATOR FOUND RUTH A
SPANISH-SPEAKING THERAPIST, WHO
HELPED DIAGNOSE RUTH AND GET HER
ON MEDICATION.
SHE ALSO HELPED RUTH OBTAIN A
DRIVER'S LICENSE, CLOTHES AND
FOOD FROM LOCAL CHARITIES, AND
ENROLLED HER KIDS IN PRE-SCHOOL
AND SUMMER PROGRAMS.
>> HOW'S SHE DOING?
DEVELOPMENTALLY, SHE'S DOING
OKAY?
>> YES.
THEY JUST DID TESTS AT SCHOOL,
SO SHE PASSED.
>> Reporter: AT THE SAME TIME,
RUTH LEARNED BETTER PARENTING
SKILLS...
>> DO YOU WANT TO HAVE YOUR OWN
TIME RIGHT NOW?
>> Reporter: ...THE IMPORTANCE
OF LISTENING TO HER KIDS INSTEAD
OF PUNISHING THEM, TALKING ABOUT
THEIR FEELINGS, AND MODELING
GOOD BEHAVIOR.
THE KIDS DID ACTIVITIES TO HELP
THEM LEARN HOW TO COOPERATE MORE
AND FIGHT LESS, AND HOW TO
BETTER MANAGE THEIR EMOTIONS.
>> THIS IS HOW HE HANDLES NOW
HIS ANGER.
BEFORE, HE SCREAM AND MESSED UP
EVERYTHING, LIKE FIGHTING.
>> Reporter: A 2011 STUDY
COMPARED 78 CHILDREN IN THE
CHILD FIRST PROGRAM TO CHILDREN
NOT IN THE PROGRAM.
IT SHOWED A 68% DROP IN LANGUAGE
PROBLEMS AND A 42% DROP IN
AGGRESSIVE BEHAVIOR.
FOR MOMS, THERE WAS A 64%
DECREASE IN DEPRESSION AND OTHER
MENTAL HEALTH PROBLEMS.
BUT WITH ABOUT A QUARTER-MILLION
CHILDREN LIVING IN LOW-INCOME
FAMILIES IN CONNECTICUT ALONE,
THE GROUP STRUGGLES TO MEET THE
DEMAND FOR ITS SERVICES, WHICH
IT ESTIMATES COST ABOUT $7,800
FOR A FAMILY OF FOUR.
>> WHEN I THINK ABOUT 300
CHILDREN ON THE WAITLIST HERE IN
CONNECTICUT AND THEIR FAMILIES,
IT'S VERY HARD.
WE'RE GOING FOR THE SOURCE OF
THE PROBLEM, WE'RE GOING FOR THE
ROOT OF THE PROBLEM.
>> Reporter: TODAY, RUTH AND HER
FAMILY ARE IN A MUCH BETTER
PLACE.
>> MY DEPRESSION IS PRACTICALLY
GONE.
I FEEL SO BETTER.
NOW, I'M MORE EMPOWERED,
ENERGETIC.
>> Reporter: TWO WEEKS AGO, RUTH
GRADUATED HIGH SCHOOL AND WAS
SELECTED TO GIVE A SPEECH ABOUT
OVERCOMING OBSTACLES.
HER STORY FEATURED ON THE LOCAL
EVENING NEWS.
SHE NOW WORKS TWO PART-TIME
JOBS, AND THE CHILDREN'S FATHER
HAS JOINED THEM.
>> I GOT AN A++!
>> WOW!
THAT MEANS YOU DID WAY AWESOME.
>> Reporter: HER NEXT GOALS:
COLLEGE, AND THEN SHE WANTS TO
BUY A HOUSE.
BUT FOR NOW, THIS FAMILY OF SIX
IS LIVING ON ABOUT $30,000 A
YEAR-- STILL NEAR THE FEDERAL
POVERTY LINE-- AND THEY STILL
RELY ON FOOD STAMPS AND
MEDICAID.
BUT RUTH SAYS SHE'S MORE
EQUIPPED NOW TO HANDLE WHATEVER
COMES THEIR WAY.
>> I CAN SAY I'M HAPPY, AND I
CAN TELL I'M TRANSMITTING
HAPPINESS TO MY KIDS.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: SECRETARY OF
STATE JOHN KERRY IS BACK IN
VIENNA TONIGHT, HOPING TO MEET
TUESDAY'S LOOMING DEADLINE FOR A
DEAL ON IRAN'S NUCLEAR PROGRAM.
AND THERE ARE SIGNS OF PROGRESS.
NEGOTIATORS ARE FOCUSED ON A
U.S.-BACKED PLAN: TEHRAN WOULD
EFFECTIVELY SELL ITS NUCLEAR
MATERIAL TO BE USED AS REACTOR
FUEL.
IN RETURN, THE U.S., BRITAIN,
CHINA, FRANCE, GERMANY AND
RUSSIA WOULD EASE ECONOMIC
SANCTIONS.
ANOTHER DEADLINE IS LOOMING,
THIS ONE FOR GREECE, WHERE
EUROZONE OFFICIALS HAVE JUST
REJECTED THE LATEST FINANCIAL
BAILOUT OFFER.
GREECE IS SUPPOSED TO MAKE A 1.6
BILLION EURO PAYMENT TUESDAY.
IT OWES 245 BILLION TOTAL.
BUT GREECE SAYS IT CAN'T AFFORD
THE PAYMENT, AND IT NEEDS
ANOTHER FINANCIAL BAILOUT.
IF NEGOTIATORS CAN'T COME UP
WITH A DEAL, GREECE COULD BE
KICKED OUT OF THE EUROZONE,
POTENTIALLY THROWING THE NATION
INTO BANKRUPTCY.
IN SOUTH CAROLINA, THE FUNERALS
FOR THREE MORE SHOOTING VICTIMS
ARE BEING HELD IN CHARLESTON
TODAY.
ALL THREE ARE BEING EULOGIZED IN
THE SAME CHURCH WHERE THEY AND
SIX OTHERS WERE GUNNED DOWN JUNE
18.
SOUTH CAROLINA GOVERNOR NIKKI
HALEY, SENATOR TIM SCOTT AND THE
REVEREND JESSE JACKSON ATTENDED
THE FUNERAL FOR 54-YEAR-OLD
CYNTHIA HURD, A LOCAL LIBRARIAN.
26-YEAR-OLD TYWANZA SANDERS AND
87-YEAR-OLD SUSIE JACKSON ARE
ALSO BEING LAID TO REST.
BEFORE CHURCH SERVICES THIS
MORNING, A WOMAN SCALED THE 30-
FOOT FLAGPOLE AT THE STATEHOUSE
AND PULLED DOWN THE CONFEDERATE
FLAG.
SHE WAS ARRESTED AND AUTHORITIES
RE-RAISED THE FLAG SHORTLY
AFTER.
AND IN ALASKA, HUNDREDS OF
INDIVIDUAL WILDFIRES HAVE BEEN
BURNING ACROSS THE STATE.
THE STATE JUST RECORDED ITS
WARMEST MAY EVER, AND ITS LOWEST
SNOW TOTALS IN RECENT HISTORY.
STATE OFFICIALS SAY WILDFIRES
HAVE DEVOURED MORE THAN 428,000
ACRES THIS SEASON.
THAT'S ROUGHLY THE SIZE OF THE
CITY OF LOS ANGELES.
ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND
TOMORROW, THE ORIGINS OF
CONFLICT IN KENYA'S WAR WITH AL
SHABAB.
>> AL SHABAB IS EXTREMELY ACTIVE
HERE, AND IT IS RECRUITING YOUNG
KENYANS.
>> Sreenivasan: MORE THAN 225
PEOPLE WERE INJURED WHEN A
FLAMMABLE POWDER EXPLODED OVER A
STAGE AT A CROWDED WATER PARK IN
TAIWAN.
PEOPLE USED INNER TUBES TO TAKE
THE INJURED TO SAFETY.
IN GREECE TODAY, MORE THAN A
THIRD OF THE A.T.M.s REPORTEDLY
RAN OUT OF CASH BEFORE GREEK
BANKS REPLENISHED THEM.
GREECE MAY HAVE TO GO BACK TO
THE DRACHMA IF IT CANNOT COME UP
WITH A DEAL TO PAY BACK MILLIONS
OF EUROS IN DEBT.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.
GOOD NIGHT.